In the last video we talked about one type of higher order function where a function accepts another
function as an argument.
Now let's talk about returning a function from within a function.
So I have an example of this.
It's a little bit trickier to explain but you can kind of think of these functions as function factories.
The function itself returns another function and in the examples I'll show you the functions on the
outside the outer functions are making new versions of a function they're tweaking a function and returning
it.
So you can use it.
So let's start with a simple example.
We're going to make a function which we'll call multiply by and when I call multiply by three.
It will return a function that triples a value any anytime I call it.
So I would do something like this const triple equals multiplied by three and then I could call triple
on five and that would give me 15 I could make another function from the same factory const double equals
multiply by two.
And that returns to me a new function where I can call it in passing a number and it will be multiplied
by two.
So if I called double of eight I get sixteen so this multiplied by function returns a new function that
we can save and use.
So we'll start by defining it multiply by and it accepts a single number and we want it to return a
function.
Now this is where function expressions come in because we don't have to declare a separate function
first and then return that I can just write return function right here an anonymous function like we've
seen where we could write const X equals function like this a function expression there's no name we
don't have to have a name because we're returning this and we'll captured in a variable.
So this doesn't work just yet it does return a function.
And if I put something in here console dot log high we can call this if I run it over here if I call
multiply by I don't even need to pass in our numbers we're not using it and I saved the result to a
variable we'll just call it mystery equals multiply by if we look at mystery it holds a function and
if I execute it it runs this function.
This was the return value we could have done this on two separate lines I could have written a function
in here like const F equals function console dot log floor and then I can return f that also works if
I do the same thing.
Mystery equals multiply by and now I take a look at mystery it holds a function and I can execute it
but I think it's easier just to return it at the same time because we're not using it in this function
we're simply returning it that's it.
Okay.
So to actually implement multiply by where we accept a number what we want to do is return a function
that also accepts a single argument we'll just call it X and we want to return in that function x times
num.
So let's think about how this works if I call multiply by with the number three numbers three and it's
going to return this function right here.
So let's just copy this on its own paste it down here.
This won't stand as valid code but if we just ignore that and think of how it works this function has
num set to 3.
That's what we passed in 4 num.
So now if I have this stored in a variable like I did up here and I call this function and I pass in
some value let's say it stored in a variable.
If we pass in 3 I would call this triple.
So constant triple equals this function if I call triple on six x will be six.
And it returns six times three which gives me eighteen but if I instead called multiply by five num
would be five.
So it would return this function right here where we accept a single argument and we return that number
times five.
So when I call it I pass in to it returns two times five which gives me ten.
So this function is a factory for making more functions it modifies them.
I like to think of it as a little conveyor belt going by and it's stamping them with a different number
or a different value.
In this case num it impacts how this actual function here behaves.
If we pass an eight and we'll get back a function that multiplies by eight.
So let's actually play with this now we have multiplied by everything looks good here.
We're returning a new function return x times num.
Let's make our triple function so const triple equals multiply by three that gives me a new function.
If we look at triple we have a function.
And if I call it on a number like six we get 18 I call it on two we get six I call it on nine we get
twenty seven it's multiplying everything that I pass in by three.
Now let's make another one of these we'll call this double we'll multiply by two and if I called double
on five I get ten triple on five I get 15.
So this factory gave us two different functions.
They all followed the same pattern but it plugged in a different number and I would do one more.
But other than triple double I guess quadruples not too bad.
How about const have to cut it in half.
So multiply by not mutation event multiply by zero point five.
Let's try that.
Have of six gives me three of nine.
I get 4.5.
All right.
So this is our first example.
If you're struggling with this I told you understand this is always a tough one to teach.
It's kind of a different way of thinking about functions but remember that functions are just values
that can be passed around whether as an argument like we saw in the last video or as a return value.
And this multiply function is just changing the return value ever so slightly.
Also remember how we talked about this idea of lexical scope a couple of videos ago a nested function
has access to the scope of its parent function.
Num is not defined in this function.
It's defined up here but we have access to it and it's returned and num still has that value it persists.
So if we passed in three num as always three in this function right here num is always two num it's
always zero point five.
So let's take a look at another example.
What we're going to do is make this function which I'm calling make between func.
It will return a function where we can check if a value is between two numbers.
So I would call it like this make between function and maybe we can come up with a better name for this.
Make between func 0 and 18.
I'll save this to a variable concept is not adult is child.
So this should return to me a function where if I call it with a number like five I get true because
it's between 0 and 18 if I call it with something like 67 or 68 I should get false because it's not
within that range.
So we're making a factory for functions that serve to check if a value is between one number and another
number.
So I'll show you how it works.
This probably very confusing just to see that explanation but we'll define our function we'll call it
make between func and it will accept two numbers x and y and it needs to return a function in this function
accepts a number.
This is the return value function will pass a value into it and we want to compare that value to X and
Y.
So if num is between x and y that means it is greater than X and less than y.
Or we could make it inclusive so it's greater than or equal to x less than or equal to y.
So we could just write if num is greater than equal to x and num is less than or equal to y we could
return true.
We could do it on multiple lines like this return true else.
We don't even need the else we can just write return false but we can also shorten this even more and
just say return num greater than or equal to x and num less than or equal to y.
This is a bully and expression it gives us true or false.
So if we play around with this if we call make between func and I pass in 0 and 18 this returns to me
a function where you can imagine x is 0 and Y is 18.
So now I have this function stored in a variable potentially let's say it's called is child and then
if I call is child with 17 num will be 17 and it's plugged in here is 17 greater than or equal to zero.
Yes and is 17 less than or equal to 18.
Yes.
So this returns true.
So we get true if I pass in a different value like ninety nine we would get false.
So it's a factory for making these between functions to check if a value is between two numbers.
So let's play around with it we'll do exactly what I just had is child equals make between func from
0 to 18 and I'll call is child on 17 we get true if I call it on ninety nine we get false and we'll
just do one more for good measure one true and thirty five false but we can now make a another between
func we get a new return value let's do make between func which something we would want to check if
a number is between one number and another.
How about between 1990 and 2000 and we'll call this function is 90s so it doesn't really matter but
call it that is 90s or is in 90s.
So very poor very poor function name.
Now if I call is in 90s they run my code and I pass in nineteen eighty nine.
That's false but if I pass in 1992 through 1993 technically it includes two thousand because of the
way I wrote it where it's less than or equal to and greater than or equal to.
So we could rewrite it to not be inclusive or I could just say if it's between 1990 and 1999.
So now we have a second function.
It has the same behavior the same pattern the template of a function if you will but the x and y that
have been plugged in are different.
So this outer function is decorating or it's finalizing this function that's being returned.
Let's do one more let's make a function called is nice outside outsider is nice whether and our range
of temperatures I mean I use Fahrenheit for those of you who use Celsius.
Go ahead and do that as well.
We'll go from sixty five degrees to maybe like 80.
It's a bit too hot for me start to sweat.
So maybe seventy nine degrees let's say 60 to 79 degrees so make between funk between 60 and 79.
I'll call it is nice weather if it's 45 degrees out we get false if it's 76 degrees we get true and
if it's too hot if it's 98 degrees we get false.
So three different functions that behave kind of similarly the same pattern of behavior but they have
different values different men's and maxes that have been baked in to the actual function.
So we've made a factory that returns a type of a function a pattern but they're all tweaked to be different
just like we did up here as well.
So this whole function return value thing can take a little bit to get used to.
I would just take your time and don't panic about it if you're struggling with it like I said when I'm
teaching in person this is always one of the topics that I noticed a lot of students take a while to
wrap their head around.
So play around with this and try modifying the code make your own versions come up with other functions
instead of make between make a function called make less then or make greater than or make not equal
to and play around with that.